Version control (#162)
UBC-DSCI/introduction-to-datascience: 12-version_control.Rmd

By the end of the chapter, students will be able to:

- Describe what version control is 
and why data analysis projects can benefit from it
- Create a remote version control repository on GitHub
- use Jupyter's Git version control tools for project versioning and 
collaboration, specifically to:

  - commit changes to a local version control repository
  - push changes to a remote version control repository
  - pull changes from a remote version control repository
  - resolve merge conflicts

- Give collaborators access to a remote GitHub repository
- Communicate with collaborators using GitHub issues
- Use best practices when collaborating on a project with others

## What is version control, and why should I use it?

Data analysis projects often require iteration 
and revision to move from an initial idea to a finished product 
that is ready for the intended audience. 
Without deliberate and conscious effort towards tracking changes 
made to the analysis, projects tend to become messy. This mess can include 
mystery results files that cannot be reproduced,
temporary files with snippets of ideas, 
mind-boggling filenames like `document_final_draft_v5_final.txt`,

> large blocks of commented code "saved for later," and more. 

Author: done in 129a8de

Additionally, the iterative nature of data analysis projects 
makes it important to be able to examine earlier versions of code and writing. 
Finally, data analyses are typically completed by a team of people 
rather than a single person. 
This means that files need to be shared across multiple computers, 
and multiple people often end up editing the project simultaneously. 
In such a situation, determining who has the latest version of the project---
and how to resolve conflicting edits---can be a real challenge.

> Version control helps solve these challenges by tracking changes to the files 

Author: defined in 129a8de

in the analysis (code, writing, data, etc) over the lifespan of the project, 
including when the changes were made and who made them. 
This provides the means both to view earlier versions of the project 
and to revert changes. Version control also facilitates collaboration 
via tools to share edits with others and resolve conflicting edits. 
But even if you're working on a project alone, 
you should still use version control. 
It helps you keep track of what you've done, when you did it, 
and what you're planning to do next!
 
> *You mostly collaborate with yourself, 
> and me-from-two-months-ago never responds to email.*
> 
> --Mark T. Holder

In order to version control a project, you generally need two things: 

> a *version control system* and a *repository hosting service*. 

Author: We define them both right after that sentence, so I think we have this covered.

The version control system is the software that is responsible 
for tracking changes, sharing changes you make with others, 
obtaining changes others have made, and resolving conflicting edits.
The repository hosting service is responsible for storing a copy 
of the version controlled project online (a *repository*), 
where you and your collaborators can access it remotely, 
discuss issues and bugs, and distribute your final product. 
For both of these items, there is a wide variety of choices; 
some of the more popular ones are:

> - **Version control systems:**

Author: done in 129a8de

    - [Git](https://git-scm.com) 
    - [Mercurial](https://mercurial-scm.org)
    - [Subversion](https://subversion.apache.org)
- **Repository hosting services:**
    - [GitHub](https://github.com)
    - [GitLab](https://gitlab.com)
    - [BitBucket](https://bitbucket.org)

In this textbook we'll use Git for version control, 
and GitHub for repository hosting, 
because both are currently the most widely-used platforms.

> **Note:** technically you don't *have to* use a repository hosting service. 

> > You can, for example, use Git to version control a project

Author: I removed the reference to Git from here 129a8de

> Since most repository hosting services now offer free accounts, 
> there are not many situations in which you wouldn't 
> want to use one for your project. 

### Version control repositories

Typically when we put a data analysis project under version control, 
we create two copies of the repository. 
One we store on our local computer where we most commonly create, 
edit and delete files.
This copy is commonly referred to as our **local** repository. The other copy
is typically stored on the repository hosting service (*e.g.,* GitHub), where
we can easily share it with our collaborators. 
This copy is commonly referred to as our **remote** repository 
(Figure \@ref(fig:vc1-no-changes)).

> **Note:** In this book, we consider a workspace on a server 
> (*e.g.,* a Jupyterhub), 
> as well as a laptop or desktop computer to be the local computer.

```{r vc1-no-changes, fig.cap = 'Schematic of local and remote version control repositories.', fig.retina = 2}
image_read("img/vc2-changes.png") %>%
  image_crop("3632x2000")
```

Both copies of the repository have a working directory, 
where you easily create, edit and delete files, 

> as well as a history (Figure \@ref(fig:vc1-no-changes)). 

Reviewer: I wonder as well if we change the layout to that the diagrams are going left to right instead since we read left to right? and then make the online stuff above since we often think "cloud" up ... Maybe something like this: 
![git_github 002](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3838091/120852569-38158000-c52f-11eb-9a09-c0b81779bb64.jpeg)
Though this is probably a ton of work so I don't think its super necessary

```

Once the files we wish to commit to the repository history have been added 
to the staging area, we can then commit those flagged files to the repository.
When we do this, we are required to include a helpful *commit message* to tell 
collaborators (which included future you) about the changes that were made 
(Figure \@ref(fig:vc-ba3-commit)). 
It is important to note here that these changes are only being committed to the 
repository history on you local computer. 
The repository on GitHub has not changed, and your collaborators would not yet
be able to see your work.

```{r vc-ba3-commit, fig.cap = "The files in the staging area need a commit message to be **committed** (*i.e.*, snapshot and archived) to the repository's history on your local computer.", fig.retina = 2}
image_read("img/vc-ba3-commit.png") %>%
  image_crop("3632x1100")
```

### Pushing changes from a remote repository

Finally, once the commits that you want to share with your collaborators 
have been made, you need to *push* (*i.e.*, send) those commits 
back to GitHub. This updates the repository history on the remote repository 
(*i.e.*, GitHub) as well as the version of the files you see when you first 

> visit the repository on GitHub (the remote repository working directory)

Reviewer: same comment about concrete example

Author: Not sure what you mean here @leem44 - can you please elaborate?

Author: addressed.

(Figure \@ref(fig:vc5-push)).

```{r vc5-push, fig.cap = 'The commit needs to be **pushed** to send the changes to the remote repository on GitHub.', fig.retina = 2}
image_read("img/vc5-push.png") %>%
  image_crop("3632x2000")
```

### Pulling changes from a remote repository

If your collaborators send their own commits to the GitHub repository, 
they will only initially exist there 
and not on your own machine (Figure \@ref(fig:vc2-changes)).

```{r vc6-remote-changes, fig.cap = 'Changes pushed by collaborators, or created directly on GitHub will not be automatically sent to your local computer.', fig.retina = 2}
image_read("img/vc6-remote-changes.png") %>%
  image_crop("3632x2000")
```

> To get the new changes from the remote repository on GitHub, 

Reviewer: e.g. if your collaborator makes a change to document X and you want to blah blah

(Figure \@ref(fig:upload-files-01)).

```{r upload-files-01, fig.cap = 'New files of any type can be uploaded to GitHub.', fig.retina = 2}
image_read("img/version_control/upload-files_01.png") %>%
  image_flop() %>%
  image_crop("3584x1600") %>%
  image_flop()
```

To select the files from your local computer to upload, you can either drag and 
drop them into the grey box area shown below, or click the "choose your files" 
link to access a file browser dialog. Once the files you want to upload have 
been selected, click the green "Commit changes" button at the bottom of the 
page (Figure \@ref(fig:upload-files-02)).

```{r upload-files-02, fig.cap = 'Uploaded files can specified by dragging them into the GitHub website where specified (red circle) or by clicking on the "choose your files" to select them via a file browser. Uploaded files are also required to be committed along with an associated commit message.', fig.retina = 2}
image_read("img/version_control/upload-files_02.png") %>%
  image_flop() %>%
  image_crop("3584x2200") %>%
  image_flop()
```

Note that Git and GitHub are designed to track changes in individual files. 

> *Do not* upload your whole project in an archive file (e.g. `.zip`), because

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Do not* upload your whole project in an archive file (e.g. `.zip`). If you do,
```

then Git can only keep track of changes to the entire `.zip` file---that 
wouldn't be very useful if you're trying to see the history of changes to a 
single code file in your project!

## Cloning your repository on JupyterHub

Although there are several ways to create and edit files on 
GitHub, they are not quite powerful enough for 
efficiently creating and editing complex files, or files that need to be 

> executed to assess whether they work (e.g., files containing code). Thus, it is 

Reviewer: Could we write this first sentence in more plain language or give an example? e.g. "You wouldn't be able to run an R code directly on GitHub"

Author: done in 129a8de

useful to be able to connect the project repository that was created on 
GitHub to a coding environment. This can be done on 
your local computer, or using a JupyterHub; below we show how to do this using a 
JupyterHub.

> We need to *clone* our project's Git repository to our JupyterHub---i.e., make a 

Reviewer: I'm guessing we talk about jupyter and jupyterhub in previous chapters? otherwise we should clarify

Author: Yes, the Jupyter chapter comes before this.

Author: addressed by a note added in 129a8de

like to send back to the project repository on GitHub.
To "add" this modified file to the staging area (*i.e.*, flag that this is a
file whose changes we would like to commit), we click the Jupyter Git extension 
icon on the far left-hand side of JupyterLab (Figure \@ref(fig:git-add-01)).

```{r git-add-01, fig.cap = 'Jupyter Git extension icon (circled in red).', fig.retina = 2}
image_read("img/version_control/git_add_01.png")
```

This opens the Jupyter Git graphical user interface pane, and then we
click the plus sign (+) beside the file that we want to "add" 
(Figure \@ref(fig:git-add-02)). 

> **Note:** because this is the first change for this file that we want to add, 
> it falls under the "Untracked" heading. 
> However, next time we edit this file 
> and want to add the changes we made, 
> we will find it under the "Changed" heading.

> **Note:** do not add the `eda-checkpoint.ipynb` file 
> (sometimes called `.ipynb_checkpoints`). 
> This file is automatically created by Jupyter when you work on `eda.ipynb`. 
> You generally do not add auto-generated files to Git repositories,
> only add the files you directly create and edit.

> ```{r git-add-02, fig.cap = 'The plus sign (+) is used to add the `eda.ipynb` file to the staging area.', fig.retina = 2}

Reviewer: I think this was a comment that Trevor brought up about not using our real github user account names.... Though I understand it may be quite bothersome to redo all these screenshots...

Author: Right... I will add this to the version control chapter final touches so we get the most recent version of the GitHub web app UI before publishing.

  image_crop("3584x1250")
```

Add an issue title (which acts like an email subject line), and then put the 
body of the message in the larger text box. Finally click "Submit new issue"
to post the issue to share with others (Figure \@ref(fig:issue-03)).

```{r issue-03, fig.cap = 'Dialog boxes and submission button for creating new GitHub issues.', fig.retina = 2}
image_read("img/version_control/issue_03.png") %>%
  image_crop("3584x2200")
```

You can reply to an issue that someone opened by adding your written response to
the large text box and clicking comment (Figure \@ref(fig:issue-04)).

```{r issue-04, fig.cap = 'Dialog box for replying to GitHub issues.', fig.retina = 2}
image_read("img/version_control/issue_04.png") %>%
  image_crop("3584x2000")
```

When a conversation is resolved, you can click "Close issue". 
The closed issue can be later viewed be clicking the "Closed" header link 
in the "Issue" tab (Figure \@ref(fig:issue-06)).

```{r issue-06, fig.cap = 'The "Closed" issues tab on the GitHub web interface.', fig.retina = 2}
image_read("img/version_control/issue_06.png") %>%
  image_crop("3584x1900")
```

## Additional resources

> Now that you've picked up the basics of version control with Git and GitHub, you can expand your knowledge using 

Reviewer: should we add specific things they should get out of each of these? I'm not too fussed about this but I think to be consistent with the other chapters...

Author: done a bit in 129a8de
